# Rust Ownership, Borrowing, and Lifetimes

I've been learning [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) recently. This will probably be my _third_ (lazy) attempt to learn the language. The reason I've failed previously is simply because I had no reason to learn it.

Other than the memory safety aspects, which I like a lot, I don't actually like the _design_ of the language at all (but that's a conversation for another day).

This time around I want to learn the language as it's pertinent to my job. A few months ago I started working for [Fastly](https://www.fastly.com/) as a Staff Software Engineer in their Developer Relations team, and their powerful [Compute@Edge](https://www.fastly.com/products/edge-compute/features) platform has strong support for Rust.

I want to start building things on the Compute@Edge platform, so here I am giving Rust another go (at least until [TinyGo](https://tinygo.org/) support matures).

So I know from prior experience the real learning curve involved with this language is going to be its memory management model, which is broken down into three sections:

1. [Ownership](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch04-00-understanding-ownership.html)
1. [Borrowing](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch04-02-references-and-borrowing.html)
1. [Lifetimes](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch10-03-lifetime-syntax.html)

Understanding the first section (ownership) requires an understanding of 'stack' vs 'heap' memory, which you may be unfamiliar with depending on your programming experience and if you've used only high-level programming languages. So here's a quick rundown...

## Stack Memory

The stack is memory that is available to your program at runtime. Data that is assigned to variables or passed as arguments to function calls are allocated onto the stack in a 'Last In, First Out' (LIFO) model, much like a stack of plates.

The only type of data that can be stored on the stack is data that has a known and fixed size. All other 'unknown' data must go onto the heap.

The stack is very fast to access data because the data is close together, unlike heap memory, and also because the data that is stored is literal (i.e. primitive types like string literals, booleans, integers etc) it means the data itself can be hard coded into the compiled Rust binary.

> **NOTE**: Rust primitive/scalar types (int, bool, float, char, string literal etc) are stored in stack memory.

## Heap Memory

The heap is memory that is also available to your program at runtime but is much slower to access than stack memory. This is because it requires a 'pointer' to locate the stored data, of which the storage area is large and very unorganized.

The heap is for memory that grows or has unknown size (such as when accepting user input, you don't know what data will be provided), and it will be allocated onto the heap by a 'memory allocator' that needs to first find a space in the heap large enough to hold the data, and then return a pointer to that space in the heap.

> **NOTE**: Rust complex types (String, Box etc.) are stored into heap memory.

## Ownership

The rules for ownership are quite simple:

- Data is assigned to a variable.
- The variable becomes the 'owner' of the data.
- There can only be one owner at a time.
- When the owner goes out of scope, the data will be dropped.

Primitive types are popped from stack memory automatically when they go out of scope (e.g. when a function block ends), while complex types must implement a `drop` function which Rust will call when out of scope (to explicitly deallocate the heap memory).

So here are some of the gotchas that trip people up:

- Primitive types are _copied_ (because it's cheap to copy stack memory).
- Primitive types have a `Copy` trait that enable this behaviour.
- Complex types _move_ ownership.
- Complex types do not have a `Copy` trait.

As an example, consider the following code, which compiles correctly because we're dealing with primitives and so the `println!()` macro used is safely able to reference both the variable `a` and `b`.

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = 123;
    let b = a;
    
    println!("a: {}, b: {}", a, b); // a: 123, b: 123
}
```

Now consider a similar example which _doesn't_ work because we're dealing with a complex type (`String`). The value assigned to `a` is _moved_ to `b`. The `b` variable has now become the new _owner_ of the data, and this means `a` is not allowed to be used again (e.g. we can't reference it in `println!()`).

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = String::from("foo");
    let b = a;
    
    println!("a: {}, b: {}", a, b); // COMPILER ERROR
}
```

This will generate the following compiler error:

```rust
error[E0382]: borrow of moved value: `a`
 --> src/main.rs:5:30
  |
2 |     let a = String::from("foo");
  |         - move occurs because `a` has type `String`, which does not implement the `Copy` trait
3 |     let b = a;
  |             - value moved here
4 |     
5 |     println!("a: {}, b: {}", a, b);
  |                              ^ value borrowed here after move
```

The only solution here is to manually _copy_ the value using the [`.clone()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/alloc/string/struct.String.html#impl-Clone) method of the `String` type, which means `b` no longer becomes the new owner of the data (the data itself is duplicated and so it's _new_ data that `b` is the owner of):

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = String::from("foo");
    let b = a.clone();
    
    println!("a: {}, b: {}", a, b); // a: foo, b: foo
}
```

Using `clone()` will duplicate the heap memory, which isn't cheap. This forces the programmer to opt into this more expensive behaviour, and is a performance/design decision most users of high-level programming languages don't often have to think about.

It's important to realise that passing a variable to a function will either move or copy (just as assignment does), and that even a function's return value can transfer ownership in the same way. So for example, returning a complex type will move ownership to the caller (and the variable the returned value is assigned to becomes the new owner).

In that scenario the complex type's `drop` function is _not_ called, as would normally be the case if a variable went out of scope at the end of a function (even if the original variable/owner was created within the function) as the compiler is able to determine that the value shouldn't be dropped and instead is being _moved_ to a new owner somewhere else in your program.

## Borrowing

The concept of borrowing is designed to make dealing with ownership changes easier. It does this by avoiding the _moving_ of owners. The way it does this is by letting your program provide a 'reference' to the data. This means the receiver of the reference (e.g. a function, struct field or a variable etc) can use the value temporarily without taking ownership of it.

To pass a reference instead of passing over ownership, all you have to do is prefix your variable with an ampersand:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("foo");
    
    borrow(&s) // pass a 'reference' to s
}

fn borrow(s: &String) { // accept a 'reference type'
    println!("s: {}", s);
}
```

In the above example, the `s` argument variable of the `borrow` function will be created on the stack, and will _point_ to data in heap memory. When the `borrow` function finishes and the `s` variable is popped off the stack it won't delete any data because it never owned the data that `s` was pointing to.

The next thing you'll likely want to do in your programs is to have functions that borrow data to be able to _mutate_ it. That's simple enough by using the [`mut`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/keyword.mut.html) keyword.

Notice in the below example code we not only define the `main` function's `s` variable to be mutable but we also have to change the reference in the call to `borrow()` as well as the `borrow` function's signature to accept a mutable reference.

Also notice that after borrowing the value, we call `take_ownership()` and we don't pass a 'reference', meaning the function is the new owner of the data that was belonging to `s`:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    println!("s: {}", s); // s: foo
    
    borrow(&mut s);
    
    println!("s: {}", s); // s: foobar
    
    take_ownership(s);
    
    println!("s: {}", s); // COMPILER ERROR (ownership of s was moved)
}

fn borrow(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}

fn take_ownership(s: String) {
    println!("s: {}", s); // s: foobar
}
```

It's also important at this point to understand that defining a variable as being 'mutable' and passing a 'mutable reference' are two different things. You can see in the below example code that we have said `s` is mutable and then we pass it as an immutable reference to `borrow_no_mut()` and then as a mutable reference to `borrow_with_mut()`:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    borrow_no_mut(&s);
    borrow_with_mut(&mut s);
    
    println!("s: {}", s) // foobar
}

fn borrow_no_mut(s: &String) {
    println!("s: {}", s) // foo
}

fn borrow_with_mut(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}
```

### Gotchas

- You can't take a reference and then modify the original variable's value.

Here's an example that doesn't compile:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut x;
    x = 42;
    let y = &x;
    x = 43;
    println!("{:?}", y);
}
```

In the above example we define `x` and assign the value `42`. Next we define `y` and take a reference to `x` (i.e. we 'borrow' it). Lastly we try to reassign a new value to `x` while still holding a reference to it, which isn't allowed because it would potentially invalidate the reference.

This would result in the following compiler error:

```bash
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter1 v0.1.0 (/Users/integralist/Code/rust/rust-for-rustaceans/chapter1)
warning: value assigned to `x` is never read
 --> src/main.rs:5:5
  |
5 |     x = 43;
  |     ^
  |
  = note: `#[warn(unused_assignments)]` on by default
  = help: maybe it is overwritten before being read?

error[E0506]: cannot assign to `x` because it is borrowed
 --> src/main.rs:5:5
  |
4 |     let y = &x;
  |             -- borrow of `x` occurs here
5 |     x = 43;
  |     ^^^^^^ assignment to borrowed `x` occurs here
6 |     println!("{:?}", y);
  |                      - borrow later used here

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0506`.
warning: `chapter1` (bin "chapter1") generated 1 warning
error: could not compile `chapter1` due to previous error; 1 warning emitted
```

To solve this problem you need `y` to fall out of scope (or alternatively create a function so that when the function is called with a reference the reference drops out of scope at the end). This can be done using block scope syntax like so:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut x;
    x = 42;
    {
        let y = &x;
        println!("{:?}", y); // 42
    }
    x = 43;
    println!("{:?}", x); // 43
}
```

Another _gotcha_:

- You can have only **one** mutable reference (i.e. this prevents data races).

..._unless_! the scope allows for it.

So here is an example where it _isn't_ allowed:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    let a = &mut s;
    
    borrow(a);
    
    let b = &mut s;
    
    borrow(b);
    
    println!("a: {}", a); // COMPILER ERROR
    println!("b: {}", b);
}

fn borrow(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}
```

To make this example work we need the scope rules to allow for it, which means moving the first mutable reference assignment into its own block where the end of the newly defined block's scope will cause `a` to be dropped:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    {
        let a = &mut s;
        borrow(a);
        println!("a: {}", a); // foobar
    } // <-- a is dropped
    
    let b = &mut s;
    borrow(b);
    println!("b: {}", b); // foobarbar
}

fn borrow(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}
```

Another _gotcha_:

- You cannot have a mutable reference _and_ an immutable reference.

Here's an example where the compiler complains:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    let a = &s;     // immutable reference
    let b = &mut s; // mutable reference
    
    borrow(b);
    
    println!("a: {}", a); // COMPILER ERROR
    println!("b: {}", b);
}

fn borrow(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}
```

Multiple immutable references are safe because you're only able to _read_ the data and not mutate it, but you cannot have an immutable reference while also holding a mutable reference because this otherwise could change the value of the immutable reference (and that would be unexpected for the part of the program using the immutable reference).

The only way this would be allowed is if the immutable reference goes out of scope before the mutable reference(s) were assigned:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("foo");
    
    {
        let a = &s;
        println!("a: {}", a); // foo
    } // <-- immutable reference `a` is dropped
    
    let b = &mut s;
    borrow(b);
    println!("b: {}", b); // foobar
}

fn borrow(s: &mut String) {
    s.push_str("bar");
}
```

One last gotcha:

- You can't return a function defined variable as a reference.

Here's what that might look like:

```rust
fn main() {
    let r = return_ref();
    println!("r: {}", r); // foo
}

fn return_ref<'a>() -> &'a String {
    let s = String::from("foo");
    return &s; // COMPILER ERROR
}
```

> **NOTE**: the `<'a>` and `&'a` syntax will be explained in the next section called "Lifetimes".

The above code will cause the following compiler error:

```bash
error[E0515]: cannot return reference to local variable `s`
 --> src/main.rs:8:12
  |
8 |     return &s; // COMPILER ERROR
  |            ^^ returns a reference to data owned by the current function
```

If you look at the compiler explanation for the error (`rustc --explain E0515`) it describes the reason, and the solution:

> Local variables, function parameters and temporaries are all dropped before the end of the function body. So a reference to them cannot be returned. Consider returning an owned value instead.

So the solution to this problem is to 'move' ownership of the data to whoever is calling the function, like so:

```rust
fn main() {
    let r = return_ref();
    println!("r: {}", r); // foo
}

fn return_ref() -> String {
    let s = String::from("foo");
    return s;
}
```

In the above example the `r` variable is now the new owner of the data.

## Lifetimes

Lifetimes are tightly coupled to 'references'.

A 'lifetime' is how long a reference lives for, and the compiler wants to be sure that any reference that is currently active doesn't refer to data that no longer exists (i.e. a 'dangling pointer').

The compiler needs a way to track a reference so it can be sure the reference lives long enough for no errors to occur. To achieve this goal, the Rust compiler uses a "borrow checker" to validate a reference's lifetime.

So how do we identify the lifetime of a reference? Well, it begins when the reference is created and it ends when the reference is _last used_ (you might have expected it to be when the reference was dropped/out of scope, which would be incorrect).

What does a lifetime look like? It's just an annotation that has a specific naming convention: `'<T>` where `<T>` is a letter like `'a` or `'b`. The letters don't mean anything special, they're just a way for the compiler to track a reference.

The Rust online book has a good example of this, where they define a function that accepts two arguments `x` and `y` (both of type `&str`, i.e. a string literal) and depending on the length of the given strings you'll get back either the `x` or `y` string.

Without the lifetime feature this would be a problem for the compiler because it wouldn't be able to statically determine which variable (`x` or `y`) is going to be returned. That can only be determined at _runtime_ not compile time.

The below code example highlights how defining a single lifetime called `'a` and assigning it to both arguments (and to the return value) allows the compiler to track these references and ensure they both live long enough to prevent any errors at runtime.

```rust
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

The above code states all the references in the signature must have the same lifetime, and it tells the borrow checker it should reject any values that don't adhere to these constraints.

This means that if either of the arguments `x` or `y` don't live long enough to be used safely, the compiler will let you know about it.

Here is an example that demonstrates the potential error when the code is poorly designed:

```rust
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("a very long string");
    let result;
    {
        let string2 = String::from("short string");
        result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
    }
    println!("The longest string is {}", result);
}

fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

The above code will cause the following compiler error:

```bash
error[E0597]: `string2` does not live long enough
 --> src/main.rs:6:44
  |
6 |         result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
  |                                            ^^^^^^^ borrowed value does not live long enough
7 |     }
  |     - `string2` dropped here while still borrowed
8 |     println!("The longest string is {}", result);
  |                                          ------ borrow later used here
```

## Conclusion

Although I'm very new to these concepts that Rust defines, I get the feeling that although understanding them at a high-level (as I've described them in this post) is reasonably easy. Being able to fully appreciate them and more importantly getting _comfortable_ with them is just something that's going to take time.

Let me know if this helped you. Reach out to me on twitter.
