# WrestleMania 3

<p class="strapline">Where Legends Were Born, Hair Was Lost, and The Universe Almost Imploded</p>

<span class="image main half"><img src="../../assets/images/mania-3.jpg" alt="" /></span>

Ah, WrestleMania 3. March 29, 1987. A day where 93,173 fans packed into the
Pontiac Silverdome to see more sequins, spandex, and improbable hairdos than a
‘70s glam rock concert. It was an event that made you believe in the impossible:
that a man could bodyslam a giant, a referee could actually wrestle, and the WWF
wasn’t just sports entertainment, but a Shakespearean tragedy… if Shakespeare
had written exclusively in flexed biceps and grunts. Let’s dive into this
masterpiece of melodrama and chaos, because if you didn’t love it then, you’re
going to love it now.

## The Build-Up: Drama That Could Make Soap Operas Blush

Months of preposterous storylines, questionable betrayals, and glorious costumes
led to this event. These weren't just wrestlers—they were living, breathing
cartoons, and we loved every ridiculous second.

### 1. **Hulk Hogan vs. Andre the Giant: The Bromance Turned Soap Opera**

Once upon a time, Hulk Hogan and Andre the Giant were the best of pals. But as
any daytime drama will tell you, no friendship lasts when you throw in a title
belt and an egotistical manager like Bobby "The Brain" Heenan. Andre, clearly
tired of playing second fiddle to Hogan's endless supply of "brother" speeches,
decided it was time to challenge Hulk for the WWF Championship. Of course,
nothing says "I’m done with you, friend" like ripping someone’s shirt off on
national TV and glaring at them as if they stole your lunch money. Hogan, in his
usual wide-eyed, overly dramatic fashion, agreed to the match, and the rest is
wrestling history.

### 2. **Macho Man vs. Ricky Steamboat: A Throat-Smashing, Epic Saga**

Macho Man Randy Savage—intense, paranoid, and fueled by Slim Jims. He was the
kind of guy who could make ordering a sandwich sound like a life-or-death
decision. Ricky Steamboat, on the other hand, was all about honor and respect.
Naturally, these two opposites clashed. The drama kicked off when Savage, in one
of his most "Macho" moments, decided to crush Steamboat’s larynx with a ring
bell. Because, sure, that's how adults handle conflict. Steamboat spent months
recovering, probably cursing Savage with every raspy breath, until finally, at
WrestleMania, he sought his revenge. It wasn’t just a match—it was a telenovela,
minus the bad dubbing.

### 3. **Rowdy Roddy Piper vs. Adrian Adonis: Fashion Crimes and Haircuts**

Rowdy Roddy Piper, the man whose mouth was faster than his punches, decided he’d
had enough and wanted to "retire" (spoiler alert: he'd retire about as
successfully as a pop star on a comeback tour). But first, he had to deal with
Adrian Adonis, a man who, for reasons unknown, decided to embrace the look of a
couch cushion with an attitude. The stakes? Hair. Yes, because clearly nothing
says "settling a feud" like taking a razor to someone’s scalp. Piper, as always,
gave it his all, leaving Adonis bald, bruised, and probably rethinking his life
choices.

## The Matches: 20-Minute Bouts That Felt Like Epics

### 1. **The Can-Am Connection vs. Bob Orton & Magnificent Muraco: The ‘Meh’ Opener**

The Can-Am Connection, two shiny, happy men in matching spandex, took on Bob
Orton (a man who seemed permanently attached to his arm cast) and Don Muraco,
who clearly drew the short straw. The match was your typical "good guys win with
a roll-up" affair, the kind you watch while munching on your popcorn, wondering
if the real show was coming soon. Spoiler: it was.

### 2. **Hercules vs. Billy Jack Haynes: The Muscular Hug Fest**

This was the "Battle of the Full Nelsons," which is just a fancy way of saying
two overly muscular guys locked arms and squeezed each other until they both got
bored. Hercules, whose name sounds more impressive than his wrestling, got tired
of the whole "contest" and just beat the hell out of Haynes with a steel chain
afterward. Because, as always, when in doubt, hit someone with metal.

### 3. **King Kong Bundy, Little Tokyo & Lord Littlebrook vs. Hillbilly Jim, Little Beaver & The Haiti Kid: Giant Squashes Tiny**

Ever wonder what happens when you mix a 450-pound Bundy with wrestlers who could
fit in a suitcase? This. The sight of Bundy flattening poor Little Beaver like a
pancake is permanently seared into my brain. Hillbilly Jim, who had all the
tactical awareness of a houseplant, watched helplessly as Bundy crushed the
little guy. But hey, at least the crowd had a good time. For Beaver? Not so
much.

### 4. **Harley Race vs. Junkyard Dog: Bow Down, But Make It Violent**

Harley Race, the self-proclaimed King of Wrestling, faced Junkyard Dog in a
"Loser Must Bow" match. Junkyard Dog, a man with more bark than bite (sorry, had
to), was not the type to grovel. After losing due to some classic Bobby Heenan
interference, he fulfilled the bowing obligation by promptly smacking Race in
the head with a chair. This match was less about wrestling and more about how
long Race could keep his crown on before someone knocked it off.

### 5. **Roddy Piper vs. Adrian Adonis: The Barber Shop Brawl**

Piper and Adonis' match was a chaotic blur of slaps, punches, and exaggerated
flailing, as if someone let two Tasmanian devils loose in a hair salon. Adonis
briefly put Piper to sleep (probably the first time the crowd was quiet all
night), but Piper rallied, won, and celebrated by giving Adonis a makeover he'd
never forget—complete with a shaved head and shattered dignity. Piper retired
(temporarily, of course) with the crowd in his corner and Adonis looking like
the world’s unhappiest egg.

### 6. **The British Bulldogs & Tito Santana vs. The Hart Foundation & Danny Davis: Refereeing Gone Bad**

Danny Davis, the crooked referee turned wrestler, was about as welcome in the
ring as a fly in your soup. The British Bulldogs and Tito Santana were out for
justice after Davis cost them titles. The Harts, as always, were the masters of
technical wrestling (and sneaky tactics), while Davis spent most of the match
proving why he should’ve stayed a referee. Despite the heroic efforts of the
Bulldogs and Santana, Davis sneakily pulled off the win, probably due to all
those years practicing cheap victories with a whistle.

### 7. **Macho Man vs. Ricky Steamboat: A Literal Show-Stealer**

If WrestleMania 3 was a movie, this match was the Oscar-worthy performance that
elevated the entire script. Savage, always the perfectionist and suspiciously
fond of elbow drops, and Steamboat, with his fluid, dragon-like grace, created a
match that still gets talked about like it’s a work of art. They delivered 20
minutes of heart-stopping near falls, dazzling reversals, and athletic prowess.
In the end, Steamboat snagged the Intercontinental title with a roll-up (of
course), but the real winner was everyone watching. Savage, ever the lunatic
genius, proved that villains could be beloved too.

### 8. **Hulk Hogan vs. Andre the Giant: The Slam Heard 'Round the World**

The main event. The reason everyone packed into that stadium. Hogan, the golden
boy of the WWF, versus Andre, the literal giant who hadn’t been pinned or
slammed in decades. The match itself was more about atmosphere than action, with
Andre barely moving and Hogan doing his best to pretend he wasn’t about to break
in half. Then it happened—the bodyslam. Hogan lifted Andre (with some help from
the wrestling gods), slammed him to the mat, and secured his place as the
ultimate hero. The Silverdome shook, the crowd lost its collective mind, and
Hulkamania was officially immortalized. Wrestling, as we knew it, had reached
its peak.

## The Aftermath: Nostalgia, Legacies, and True Love for the Madness

Looking back, WrestleMania 3 wasn’t just a wrestling event—it was a moment in
time that captured everything glorious and bizarre about the WWF in the late
'80s. The over-the-top characters, the absurd storylines, and the sheer
spectacle made it unforgettable. Hogan slamming Andre? That’s the kind of thing
that got replayed so often, even kids who weren’t born yet know about it. Savage
vs. Steamboat? It’s the gold standard for what wrestling could be—two athletes
putting on a show that was as much art as it was sport. And Piper? Well, the guy
could retire a dozen times, and we’d still welcome him back with open arms and
bagpipes.

For those of us who were there (or wish we were), WrestleMania 3 isn’t just a
nostalgia trip. It’s a reminder of the magic of pro wrestling at its most
theatrical and ridiculous. It was when giants roamed the earth, heroes and
villains played out their drama in the ring, and every match felt like the
stakes couldn’t be higher. Sure, it was silly. Sure, it was exaggerated. But
that’s why we loved it. And 37 years later, that love hasn’t faded one bit.

To this day, WrestleMania 3 stands as a testament to why we watch wrestling in
the first place. It’s not just about the moves or the belts. It’s about the
larger-than-life characters, the unforgettable moments, and the shared
experience of being part of something grand, ridiculous, and wonderful. Whether
you cheered for Hogan, laughed at Piper, or cringed as Bundy squashed Little
Beaver, WrestleMania 3 gave you something to remember. And isn't that the point
of it all?
