# WrestleMania 4

<p class="strapline">The Tournament of Madness and Million Dollar Meltdowns</p>

<span class="image main half"><img src="../../assets/images/mania-4.jpg" alt="" /></span>

16 Matches, One Title, and Enough Drama to Keep a Soap Opera Going for Years

{WATCH_ALONG_NOTE}

## 1. Bad News Brown wins the Battle Royal (last eliminates Bret Hart)

Let's start off with pure chaos: the WrestleMania Battle Royal. A bunch of
wrestlers crowded in the ring, hoping for glory. But in the end, **Bad News
Brown** used his wits (and lack of morals) to throw out **Bret Hart**, claiming
victory. Then Bret smashed the trophy like a kid having a tantrum because he
didn’t get his way. Classic Hitman.

**Highlight:** Bret Hart proving once again that if he doesn't win, nobody gets a trophy.

## 2. Ted DiBiase (with Virgil and André the Giant) defeated Jim Duggan (First round tournament match)

**Ted DiBiase** didn’t need luck; he had **André the Giant** and **Virgil**.
**Jim Duggan** came in with his trusty 2x4, thinking he had a chance. Nope.
DiBiase breezed through Duggan like a rich guy ordering a latte, with André
looming ominously in the background to make sure Duggan didn’t even think about
trying.

**Highlight:** The realization that no one’s patriotism can outshine a fat
wallet and a Giant.

## 3. Don Muraco (with Superstar Billy Graham) defeated Dino Bravo (with Frenchy Martin) by disqualification (First round tournament match)

If there’s one thing **Dino Bravo** was good at, it was messing things up. And
guess what? He managed to disqualify himself by shoving the referee like he was
auditioning for a role in a bad cop show. **Don Muraco** just stood there,
probably confused, but happy to take the win. Onward to the next round!

**Highlight:** Dino Bravo proving once again why no one asked him to teach a
class on winning strategies.

## 4. Greg Valentine (with Jimmy Hart) defeated Ricky Steamboat (First round tournament match)

**Greg “The Hammer” Valentine** vs. **Ricky Steamboat** could have been a
show-stealer if not buried in the endless tournament matches. Steamboat did his
best Dragon impression, but Valentine was out here to make sure nobody had too
much fun. The Hammer slowed the match to a crawl, winning with one of the most
anti-climactic pinfalls ever. Valentine’s theme? No smiles allowed.

**Highlight:** Steamboat showing off his baby pre-match, as if to remind
everyone he’s a family man who still can't catch a break.

## 5. Randy Savage (with Miss Elizabeth) defeated Butch Reed (with Slick) (First round tournament match)

**Randy Savage** was on a mission tonight, and poor **Butch Reed** was just a
bump in the road. Miss Elizabeth was a vision of style, but Savage was all
business, hitting Reed with the flying elbow to move on. Butch’s biggest
contribution was simply being there to give Macho Man an easy warm-up.

**Highlight:** Savage flexing for the crowd like it was only a matter of time
before he’d hold the title. Spoiler alert: he was right.

## 6. One Man Gang (with Slick) defeated Bam Bam Bigelow (with Oliver Humperdink) by countout (First round tournament match)

**Bam Bam Bigelow** was agile for a big guy, but it wasn’t enough to stop **One
Man Gang** from just... existing. Bigelow somehow lost by countout, because
apparently, the Gang’s best move was just standing in the ring while Bam Bam was
too busy trying to do cartwheels outside. Yup, that’s how it ended.

**Highlight:** Bam Bam probably regretting those cartwheels, but hey, at least
the crowd got to see a 350-pound man defy gravity.

## 7. Jake Roberts vs. Rick Rude (with Bobby Heenan) ended in a time-limit draw (First round tournament match)

The **Snake** and the **Ravishing One** went head-to-head in a match that lasted
way too long without anyone actually winning. 15 minutes of headlocks, stalling,
and Rude flexing. The match ended with no victor, and the crowd? Probably
wishing they could get those 15 minutes back.

**Highlight:** Rick Rude’s airbrushed tights, because when you’re not winning,
at least you can look fabulous.

## 8. The Ultimate Warrior defeated Hercules (with Bobby Heenan)

**The Ultimate Warrior** ran to the ring, shook the ropes, grunted a few times,
and basically destroyed **Hercules** in under 5 minutes. You could call this a
match, but it was more like the Warrior showing off his cardio for the night.
Herc, well, he got to play victim.

**Highlight:** The Ultimate Warrior’s ropes-shaking routine, where he burned
more calories than he did in the actual match.

## 9. Hulk Hogan vs. André the Giant (with Ted DiBiase and Virgil) ended in a double disqualification (Quarter-final tournament match)

This wasn’t a match, it was a sequel to _WrestleMania III_ with a lot less magic
and a whole lot more shenanigans. **Hulk Hogan** and **André the Giant** squared
off again, but the fun lasted about five minutes before both were disqualified
for whacking each other with chairs. Classic Hogan and André.

**Highlight:** Hogan realizing he didn’t need to pin André again to stay
relevant.

## 10. Ted DiBiase defeated Don Muraco (with Superstar Billy Graham) (Quarter-final tournament match)

**Don Muraco** tried to make it to the finals, but against **Ted DiBiase**,
there’s only so much you can do without a few million bucks and a Giant at your
disposal. DiBiase took Muraco down in under 6 minutes and strutted his way into
the next round.

**Highlight:** DiBiase reminding everyone that in the WWF, money isn’t
everything—it’s the only thing.

## 11. Randy Savage (with Miss Elizabeth) defeated Greg Valentine (with Jimmy Hart) (Quarter-final tournament match)

**Randy Savage** was on fire. **Greg Valentine** was... well, slow and
methodical, as usual. But Savage didn’t care; he flew around the ring like a man
with something to prove, and he hit his signature flying elbow to take the win.
Valentine could have taken notes on speed.

**Highlight:** Miss Elizabeth continuing to look more glamorous than anyone in
the building.

## 12. Brutus Beefcake defeated The Honky Tonk Man (c) (with Jimmy Hart and Peggy Sue) by disqualification (Singles match for the WWF Intercontinental Championship)

**The Honky Tonk Man**, forever the weasel, escaped **Brutus Beefcake**’s
clutches with a DQ loss, holding onto his **Intercontinental Championship** like
it was his personal lifeline. Beefcake got the win, but Honky Tonk kept the
belt, laughing all the way to the next town.

**Highlight:** Honky Tonk proving that if you can’t win clean, just lose dirty
and call it a victory.

## 13. The Islanders (Haku and Tama) and Bobby Heenan defeated The British Bulldogs (Davey Boy Smith and Dynamite Kid) and Koko B. Ware

**Bobby Heenan** in a match? Oh boy. The **British Bulldogs** and **Koko B.
Ware** were solid, but this was about Heenan pulling off a sneaky win with the
help of his **Islanders**. Koko probably wondered why he got stuck in this mess,
and Davey Boy was too busy chasing after Heenan to realize his team lost.

**Highlight:** Bobby Heenan actually winning a match, which may have been the
greatest upset of the night.

## 14. Randy Savage (with Miss Elizabeth) defeated One Man Gang (with Slick) by disqualification (Semi-final tournament match)

**One Man Gang** tried to intimidate **Randy Savage**, but ended up getting
himself disqualified for bringing a cane into the match. Apparently, the Gang
didn’t read the rulebook. Savage, ever the opportunist, advanced to the finals
without even breaking a sweat.

**Highlight:** The referee disqualifying the Gang for attempting to use a weapon
that he wasn’t even subtle about.

## 15. Demolition (Ax and Smash) (with Mr. Fuji) defeated Strike Force (Tito Santana and Rick Martel) (c) (Tag team match for the WWF Tag Team Championship)

**Demolition** was ready to break bones, and unfortunately for **Strike Force**,
they were first on the menu. **Rick Martel** and **Tito Santana** gave it their
all, but Demolition's brute force and a little outside interference from **Mr.
Fuji** meant new tag team champions. Ax and Smash celebrated like they just
conquered a small country.

**Highlight:** Mr. Fuji proving once again that cheating never goes out of
style.

## 16. Randy Savage (with Miss Elizabeth) defeated Ted DiBiase (with André the Giant) (Tournament final for the vacant WWF World Heavyweight Championship)

**The Million Dollar Man** vs. **The Macho Man**. DiBiase had **André** in his
corner, but Savage had something more powerful: destiny (and **Hulk Hogan**, who
showed up to even the odds). After an elbow drop from the top, **Randy Savage**
was crowned the new WWF Champion, and he celebrated with **Miss Elizabeth** in a
moment that screamed ‘80s glory. DiBiase went home without a title, but don’t
worry, he still had his millions.

**Highlight:** Savage hoisting the championship and Miss Elizabeth like he had
just won the lottery of life.

## The Legacy: When Wrestling Was a Tournament, and Life Was Simple

WrestleMania IV may have been chaotic, long, and filled with more
disqualifications than actual pinfalls, but it’s also a reminder of an era when
wrestling was larger-than-life, and everything felt possible. The idea of a
one-night tournament for the WWF Championship? It was pure wrestling magic —
like a carnival ride of surprise twists, underdogs, and heroic comebacks,
wrapped up in a four-hour spectacle that had us glued to our TV sets.

Looking back, it’s easy to laugh at the absurdities — Ted DiBiase trying to buy
the title, One Man Gang thinking a cane was a secret weapon, and Randy Savage’s
insane marathon run to the top. But beneath the sarcasm and spectacle was the
beauty of professional wrestling in its golden age. The good guys were easy to
cheer for, the villains easy to despise, and somehow, no matter what happened,
we left the show feeling like we’d just witnessed something incredible.

And let’s not forget about the unforgettable moments: Randy Savage, after three
hard-fought wins, standing tall as the WWF Champion with Miss Elizabeth by his
side, celebrating with the crowd like it was the perfect ending to the greatest
underdog story ever told. It wasn’t just about the title; it was about the
journey, the storylines that pulled us in, and the wrestlers who became our
heroes.

In a way, WrestleMania IV was like wrestling itself in the late ‘80s — big,
brash, sometimes messy, but always memorable. The tournament format may have
been a one-time experiment, but it was a night filled with characters who felt
larger-than-life, with stakes that seemed monumental. No fancy pyrotechnics, no
overly scripted promos, just pure wrestling magic that drew us all in and made
us believe.

Sure, we can poke fun at the disqualifications, the endless matches, and the odd
pacing. But at the end of the day, it’s the kind of chaos we miss, the kind that
feels charming in hindsight. WrestleMania IV wasn’t perfect, but it was
unforgettable. It reminds us of a time when wrestling was simpler, the heroes
were pure, the villains were dastardly, and life, just like the matches, felt
larger-than-life. And that’s a legacy worth celebrating.
