# Programming at the edge with Fastly Compute

So you've heard about computing at the edge, and you've heard that [Fastly][1]
let's you run JavaScript, Go, Rust and [any other language][2] that compiles to
Wasm at the edge... well, let's take a look and while we're at it let's try and
understand how caching works there too.

## Getting started

OK, first thing you're going to need is a [fastly account][3] so follow the link
and sign up for FREE (for more details see [here][4]).

> **NOTE:** Fastly has recently updated its [UI][7] to make creating a new
> Compute service even easier by providing a step through wizard-style
> experience to set up and configure a new service (go check it out).

Next you're going to need the [Fastly CLI][5] to make interacting with Fastly's
services and products much more efficient, so again, follow the link and get it
installed, or you can clone the [public repo][6] and run `make install`.

When running the CLI you'll need an API token so you can either generate a token
via the [Fastly UI][7] and then copy/paste it into the CLI using the following
command (where it will prompt you to enter the token):

```shell
fastly profile create
```

Or you can use SSO (Single Sign-On) to automatically generate a short-lived
token that is automatically assigned to the CLI profile (and the token will be
refreshed automatically when it expires `:chef-kiss:`):

```shell
fastly profile create --sso
```

To make sure the CLI is set up correctly, run the following command:

```shell
fastly whoami
```

## Create a new Compute project

A Compute project is a directory that contains your service/application code +
some configuration files required by the CLI to build a Compute 'package'.

A Compute package is a `.tar.gz` file containing a `main.wasm` binary and a
[`fastly.toml` manifest file][9]. The CLI handles the creation of the package, and
even the initial service/application code generation.

To create a new package you can run the following command, which will prompt you
for all the information, such as what language you want to use and which Fastly
[starter kit][8] should be used as the basis for your application code:

```shell
fastly compute init
```

Or if you know what language you want to use, then you can avoid all the prompts
and let the CLI choose the 'default' starter kit using the following command:

```shell
fastly compute init --language go --non-interactive
```

The above command selects Go as the language I want to use for building my
compute service.

The `init` subcommand is going to generate the following files:

```plain
.
â”œâ”€â”€ README.md
â”œâ”€â”€ fastly.toml
â”œâ”€â”€ go.mod
â”œâ”€â”€ go.sum
â””â”€â”€ main.go
```

The only file here that will likely need explaining is the [`fastly.toml`
manifest][9] file:

```toml
authors = [""]
cloned_from = "https://github.com/fastly/compute-starter-kit-go-default"
description = ""
language = "go"
manifest_version = 3
name = "example"
service_id = ""

[scripts]
  build = "go build -o bin/main.wasm ."
  env_vars = ["GOARCH=wasm", "GOOS=wasip1"]
  post_init = "go get github.com/fastly/compute-sdk-go@latest"
```

Compute packages are configured using this `fastly.toml` file in the root of the
project directory tree. This file specifies configuration metadata related to a
variety of tasks:

1. Attribution of the package (e.g., name, author)
1. Information required by the CLI to compile and upload it to a compatible
   Fastly service
1. Configuration of local server environments
1. Bootstrapping of service configuration

I'll explain more, but for now let's run our project locally so we can see it
working...

## Run your code locally

At this point we can actually run our project locally without even having to
deploy it!

Running the following command, will compile your project, create a package, and
pass the package to a local server environment called [Viceroy][10] which runs
your package and exposes a local web server for you to interact with:

```shell
fastly compute serve
```

> **NOTE:** If you want to iteratively develop your application then you can
> pass the `--watch` flag to have the CLI monitor your files for changes and to
> hot reload your application.
>
> **TIP:** If you want to configure files to be ignored then create a
> `.fastlyignore` file. It works like `.gitignore` so should be familiar to you.

You should see CLI output that looks a bit like the following:

```plain
$ fastly compute serve

âœ“ Verifying fastly.toml
âœ“ Identifying package name
âœ“ Identifying toolchain
âœ“ Running [scripts.build]
âœ“ Creating package archive

SUCCESS: Built package (pkg/example.tar.gz)

âœ“ Running local server

INFO: Command output:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2024-06-12T09:51:25.191538Z  WARN no backend definitions found in /private/tmp/example/fastly.toml
2024-06-12T09:51:25.191658Z  INFO Listening on http://127.0.0.1:7676
```

Opening `http://127.0.0.1:7676` in your web browser should show the result of
running the [Go default starter kit][11] code, which generates an `<iframe>`
loading a Fastly hosted welcome page.

## Sending requests to an origin server

OK, so let's open up the `main.go` and delete all the code and replace it with
the following:

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"io"
	"time"

	"github.com/fastly/compute-sdk-go/fsthttp"
)

func main() {
	fsthttp.ServeFunc(func(ctx context.Context, w fsthttp.ResponseWriter, r *fsthttp.Request) {
		r.Header.Add("TheTime", time.Now().String())
		r.CacheOptions.TTL = 30 

		resp, err := r.Send(ctx, "httpme")
		if err != nil {
			w.WriteHeader(fsthttp.StatusBadGateway)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, err.Error())
			return
		}

		resp.Header.Set("Cache-Control", "public, s-maxage=86400")
		w.Header().Reset(resp.Header)
		w.WriteHeader(resp.StatusCode)
		io.Copy(w, resp.Body)
	})
}
```

The `fsthttp.ServeFunc` essentially sets up a listener for incoming requests and
the given function is the request handler. Inside the request handler we do the
following things:

- Add a HTTP header to the incoming request object:
  ```go
  r.Header.Add("TheTime", time.Now().String())
  ```
- Override the HTTP caching behaviour of the _response_ (I'll come back to
  this):
  ```go
  r.CacheOptions.TTL = 30
  ```
- Forward the request to a 'backend' called `httpme` (again, we'll come back to
  this):
  ```go
  r.Send(ctx, "httpme")
  ```
- Set (and possibly override) the `Cache-Control` HTTP header on the response:
  ```go
  resp.Header.Set("Cache-Control", "public, max-age=60")
  ```
- Copy all of the response headers from the backend to the user's response:
  ```go
  w.Header().Reset(resp.Header)
  ```
- Send an appropriate response status code:
  ```go
  w.WriteHeader(resp.StatusCode)
  ```
- Start _streaming_ the backend response body to the user:
  ```go
  io.Copy(w, resp.Body)
  ```

OK, so there were two things we need to get a better grip on:

1. Fastly backends
1. Fastly caching behaviour

Let's get into it...

## Fastly backends

A backend is something that needs to be defined explicitly, it's an origin
server owned and managed by you. For example, you might have an API service that
you want your Compute service/application to communicate with to get data.

To define a backend we need to first create one within our Compute service. We
can do this in many ways (e.g. the Fastly UI, the Fastly API or the Fastly CLI).

For simplicity we're going to use the `fastly.toml` manifest file to configure a
backend, that will be created when we come to deploy our Compute
service/application for the first time. We'll also use the manifest file to
configure a backend that will be used when running our Compute
service/application locally, because we might want to use a mock backend
locally (although for our case we'll use the same production backend).

Add the following to your `fastly.toml` manifest file:

```toml
[setup.backends.httpme]
address = "http-me.glitch.me"
port = 443

[local_server.backends.httpme]
override_host = "http-me.glitch.me"
url = "https://http-me.glitch.me"
```

The first block `[setup.backends.httpme]` is used only once by the CLI when you
come to deploy your service (I'll show you that later). It tells the CLI, when
it's creating your Compute service, to also create a backend called `httpme` and
to make sure it has the specified address and port.

The second block `[local_server.backends.httpme]` is used by Viceroy when
running your Compute service/application locally. Whenever your code uses the
`Send` method on a `fsthttp.Request`, it will ensure the request is forwarded to
the specified backend, which in this case is the real service
[https://http-me.glitch.me][15].

So in our application code where we have `r.Send("httpme")` you can now see that
this is sending the request to a 'backend' object called `httpme` which we've
now defined/created indirectly via the `fastly.toml` manifest file.

Now, defining backends is a bit tedious, and the primary reason for this design
is security. That said, if you're willing to forego security, then you can ask
use something called a 'dynamic backend' which allows you to define backends at
runtime in your code (see [here][16] for an example).

## Fastly caching behaviour

Now let's look at Fastly's caching behaviour as it's a bit confusing. I'm going
to reference the official Fastly doc [Caching content with Fastly][13]:

> The Fastly edge cache is an enormous pool of storage across our network which
> allows you to satisfy end user requests with exceptional performance and
> reduce the need for requests to your origin servers. Most use cases make use
> of the [readthrough cache interface][14], which works automatically with the
> HTTP requests that transit your Fastly service to save responses in cache so
> they can be reused. The first time a cacheable resource is requested at a
> particular POP, the resource will be requested from your backend server and
> stored in cache automatically. Subsequent requests for that resource can then
> be satisfied from cache without having to be forwarded to your servers.

So what this means is that Fastly uses something called a 'readthrough' cache by
default. The readthrough cache respects HTTP caching semantics. So if your
backend returns a response with a HTTP header such as:

```plain
Cache-Control: s-maxage=300, max-age=0
```

...then the readthrough cache will cache the response for 300s (i.e. it'll use
the value assigned to `s-maxage`). So when the next request comes into your
Compute service/application, and it reaches the `r.Send()` line, then that will
respond immediately with the cached content and not actually make a call to the
backend.

But what about the `max-age`? Well, that's for the browser. The user's web
browser will only see `Cache-Control: max-age=0` as `s-maxage` is for proxies
and CDNs and so Fastly will strip it from the response header.

> **NOTE:** If you want more information on HTTP caching then take a look at my
> blog post [HTTP Caching Guide][12] which explains all the details.

Now, this is where the following lines in our Compute service/application code
are going to affect things. Let's take a look...

So _before_ we forwarded the incoming request to the backend (using `Send`) we
actually configured the readthrough to ignore what is being set in the backend's
response (i.e. ignoring the `Cache-Control` header) and to blanket cache the
response for 30 seconds. We do this using:

```go
// https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/fastly/compute-sdk-go@v1.3.1/fsthttp#CacheOptions
r.CacheOptions.TTL = 30
```

The reason we have to do this _before_ sending the request is because of how the
readthrough cache works (i.e. it automatically handles caching the responses).

> **NOTE:** Fastly also provides a 'simple' cache interface and a more advanced
> 'core' cache interface exposed via the Compute SDKs. You can see examples
> [here][17].

Before we send our response to the user we actually modify the cache behaviour
again, but this time for the user's web browser by overriding the backend's
`max-age=0` with `max-age=60`:

```go
resp.Header.Set("Cache-Control", "public, max-age=60")
```

> âš ï¸  **WARNING:** There's a caveat to the readthrough cache that you'll want to
> be careful with. If your backend sends `Cache-Control: private`, then
> understandably the readthrough cache will not cache the response because your
> backend has defined that behaviour. In this case, setting `r.CacheOptions.TTL`
> will have NO EFFECT. It's only usable for responses that Fastly considers
> _cacheable_ and `private` is not cacheable. You would need your backend to
> change the `Cache-Control` value to be something cacheable if you wanted
> `r.CacheOptions.TTL` to have any kind of effect.

## Deploying your Compute service

To wrap up this post, let's get our Compute service/application deployed:

```shell
fastly compute publish
```

The above command will prompt you whenever information is required, or you can
simplify the process and add the `--non-interactive` flag to let Fastly choose
default values for everything:

```shell
fastly compute publish --non-interactive
```

For the first time deploying you may find it takes a bit of time because Fastly
is uploading your package across its global fleet of servers. For me I've
noticed the first deploy takes around ~30s but after that, any further changes I
make to my application is almost immediately uploaded/replicated ðŸŽ‰

You should see output similar to the following:

```plain
$ fastly compute publish --non-interactive

âœ“ Verifying fastly.toml
âœ“ Identifying package name
âœ“ Identifying toolchain
âœ“ Running [scripts.build]
âœ“ Creating package archive

SUCCESS: Built package (pkg/example.tar.gz)

âœ“ Verifying fastly.toml
âœ“ Creating service
âœ“ Creating domain 'regularly-living-cheetah.edgecompute.app'
âœ“ Uploading package
âœ“ Activating service (version 1)
âœ“ Checking service availability (status: 200)

Manage this service at:
	https://manage.fastly.com/configure/services/IuZqijThLa4VawBcGy7ba6

View this service at:
	https://regularly-living-cheetah.edgecompute.app

SUCCESS: Deployed package (service IuZqijThLa4VawBcGy7ba6, version 1)
```

Good luck, and I hope you enjoy programming at the edge with Fastly ðŸ™‚

[1]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/developers/
[2]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/guides/compute/custom/
[3]: https://www.fastly.com/signup/
[4]: https://www.fastly.com/pricing/
[5]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/reference/tools/cli/
[6]: https://github.com/fastly/cli
[7]: https://manage.fastly.com/
[8]: https://docs.fastly.com/en/guides/working-with-compute-services#creating-a-new-compute-service
[9]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/reference/compute/fastly-toml/
[10]: https://github.com/fastly/viceroy
[11]: https://github.com/fastly/compute-starter-kit-go-default
[12]: /posts/http-caching-guide/
[13]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/guides/concepts/edge-state/cache/
[14]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/guides/concepts/edge-state/cache/#readthrough-cache
[15]: https://http-me.glitch.me
[16]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/solutions/examples/register-a-dynamic-backend/
[17]: https://www.fastly.com/documentation/guides/concepts/edge-state/cache/#interfaces
