# Vim Workflow (Part Deux)

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [No more tmux](#no-more-tmux)
- [Vim windows](#vim-windows)
- [Long running commands](#long-running-commands)
- [Managing windows](#managing-windows)
- [Plugins](#plugins)
  - [Ctrl-p](#ctrl-p)
  - [Ack](#ack)
  - [EndWise](#plugins)
  - [Powerline](#plugins)
  - [NERDTree](#nerdtree)
  - [Surround](#surround)
  - [HTML5](#plugins)
  - [Tabular](#plugins)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Useful Vim features/commands](#useful-vim-featurescommands)
  - [Search and Replace across multiple
    files](#search-and-replace-across-multiple-files)
  - [Moving between brackets](#moving-between-brackets)
  - [Auto indenting](#auto-indenting)
  - [Changing content](#changing-content)
  - [Selecting content](#selecting-content)
  - [Using the register](#using-the-register)
  - [Buffer management](#buffer-management)
  - [Jump List](#jump-list)
  - [Change List](#change-list)
  - [Case Insensitive Searching](#case-insensitive-searching)
  - [Regular Expressions](#regular-expressions)
  - [Removing line spaces](#removing-line-spaces)
  - [Switching case](#switching-case)
  - [Moving forward and backwards by code not
    words](#moving-forward-and-backwards-by-code-not)
  - [Repeating yourself](#repeating-yourself)
  - [Appending to end of a line](#appending-to-end-of-a-line)
  - [Searching for current word](#searching-for-current-word)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Introduction

If you've not read over my two previous Vim posts ([A guide to getting started with Vim](http://www.integralist.co.uk/posts/a-guide-to-getting-started-with-vim/) and [Vim Workflow](http://www.integralist.co.uk/posts/vim-workflow/)) then I suggest you do that
first as that'll give you an idea of how I use Vim and what my previous workflow
was like.

I've decided that it was time to simplify my Vim set-up and to better automate
and understand some processes. 

Note: not all of this was related to just Vim but my general dotfiles set-up as well.

Hopefully by sharing my updated workflow you might pick up some techniques that
you like and want to utilise yourself (or maybe not).

## No more tmux

I love [tmux](http://tmux.sourceforge.net/) but for all its power I pretty much
only ever used it for spliting the screen into panes (or Windows if you're
talking Vim terminology).

The one really cool feature of a pane in tmux was the fact that it could just be
pointed at a terminal shell (so I could run shell commands without affecting my
current Vim window).

So why would I give that up? What am I using now?

Well, I'm just using Vim's standard windows feature! So let me explain *how* I use Vim windows...

**Update**: just to be clear that I do still use tmux but only when I'm doing TDD or refactoring with tests. That is the one instance where I'll fire up two tmux panes (one to hold Vim and the other to be a terminal running my tests -> this makes the 'red, green, refactor' feedback loop nice and tight).

## Vim windows

When I create a new window in Vim (same as a tmux pane), the new window
holds a copy of the current file. I then just use the Ctrl-p plugin to
open another file (see the below section on plugins if you're not sure what
Ctrl-p is).

If I want to run a command I will typically push Vim into the background and run
the command, simple (it doesn't need to be more complicated than that). 

To do this you press `Ctrl-z` which will take you out of Vim and
back into the shell where you can run your commands. You then press `fg` to
bring Vim back to be the (f)ore (ground) process.

## Long running commands

If you have a long running command (e.g. `grunt watch`) then this is where the
tmux pane would be really handy, because I could open a new pane and leave it
running alongside working in Vim. This isn't possible in Vim, but the solution
is just as easy: open a new tab!

If you have a long running command such as a grunt task which watches
files and then compiles them when they are updated, then you're not going to
really be interested in looking at that output (well, majority of the time
you're not). So just have it run in a separate tab and you can easily switch back
over to it to see the output if you want. You can then just easily switch back to
the Vim tab when you're ready.

Is this a perfect solution? Of course not.  
Does it mean I can drop a dependency? Absolutely.

If I can make life simpler (within reason) then I think that's a better
situation to be in.

**UPDATE:**

As pointed out by [@kenturamon](http://twitter.com/kenturamon), he uses Guard to
run his Ruby tests and for proper TDD (test-driven development) he needs
a constant feedback loop rather than switching tabs all the time. In situations
like that then using tmux is the best bet. You don't have to use tmux all the
time but I have no issue with using the best tool for the job when the
circumstances dictate it.

## Managing windows

The default keys for moving around and manipulating Vim's windows are a bit ugly
and awkward to use.

I find that I use the &lt;leader&gt; key `\` all the time. It's in the perfect
spot for my fingers to hit it whenever I need it. So I map a few of the window
keys to use the leader key instead...

    " Make handling Vim windows easier
    map <leader>w- <C-W>- " smaller
    map <leader>w+ <C-W>+ " larger
    map <leader>w[ <C-W>= " equal
    map <leader>w] <C-W>_ " fill screen

    " Make splitting Vim windows easier
    map <leader>; <C-W>s
    map <leader>` <C-W>v

...as you can see, if I want to create a horizontal split window then I just
press: `\;` and if I want the vertical equivalent I just press: \\`

If I want the current window to fill the screen I press: `\w]` and if I want all
windows to be equal size again then I press: `\w[`.

Finally if I want the current window to be slightly larger, then I press: `\w+`
or `\w-` if I want it slightly smaller.

If you have lots of split windows open and you want to close them all then `:q`
wont work that well as it means you'll have to close each window individually.
Instead run `:only` to close all windows except the current one and then run
`:q` to close the last one.

If you split the current screen into too many windows you may find the full
screen feature is no longer very effective (because there are so many split
screens, the current window doesn't have much space left over to fill up), then you can
instead move that window out into a separate Tab by executing `Ctrl-w` followed by `Shift-T`.

But be aware of two things:

1. this moves the split window completely into a new tab (so doesn't stay as a
   split window as well)
2. this is rarely needed for me any way (I hardly have more than 4 files open at
   once, if I do I'm clearly doing too much)

So there you have it. Nice, simple and quick solutions which mean I don't require the full range of tmux features. 

This gives me the majority of the functionality I need when dealing with files.

### Tabs

Vim's tab feature is something I very rarely use but like I say, if you're using
Vim's window features like I am, and once in a while when you do find full screening a window pane
isn't working out, then extracting that window out into a tab is the only way to go (in
tmux you can just press `Ctrl-z` and that would properly full screen the current
pane - but not using tmux any more isn't really much of an issue for me nowadays and so I can
live with the standard full screen feature available to Vim windows).

In case you're wondering you can create a new tab with the command `:tabnew` and
you can move between tabs using `gt` which moves forward through your tab list
and `gT` to move backwards through the tab list.

You can also close all tab instances except the current one using `:tabo` (as a 
shortcut for `:tabonly`).

To move to a specific tab then just use `ngt` where `n` is the number of the tab
you want to switch to. So for example if you have four tabs open then `4gt` will
switch you to the fourth tab.

Finally you can rearrange tabs if you want to. I'm not sure why I'm going into
so much detail about tabs when it's very rare that I use them, but because they
do crop up every once in a while it's nice to know what's possible (i.e. the
better you understand your craft and your tool of choice the more efficient you
can be). To move a tab simply execute `:tabmove n` where `n` is the space you
want it to occupy. If you don't specify a number then the tab will be moved to
the end of the tab list. But be aware that the tab list is zero-indexed so
moving to the first space would be `:tabmove 0`.

## Plugins

So there are quite a few plugins I use, some of the most vital ones I'll list below:

- [Ctrl-p](http://www.github.com/kien/ctrlp.vim)
- [Ack](http://www.github.com/mileszs/ack.vim) (well, I use
  [Ag](http://www.github.com/ggreer/the_silver_searcher) behind the scenes)
- [EndWise](http://www.github.com/tpope/vim-endwise)
- [Powerline](http://www.github.com/Lokaltog/powerline)
- [NERDTree](https://github.com/scrooloose/nerdtree)
- [Surround](http://www.github.com/tpope/vim-surround)
- [HTML5](http://www.github.com/othree/html5.vim)
- [Tabular](http://www.github.com/godlygeek/tabular)

I'll discuss just a couple of them in more detail...

### Ctrl-p

**Opening multiple files**

Although Ctrl-p is execellent for fuzzy searching for a particular file and opening 
it really quickly, most people don't take advantage of all its features such as
the ability to open multiple files at once.

When you open Ctrl-p (I have it mapped to `\t` for quicker access) you can press
`Ctrl-z` multiple times for each file you want to open and then press either
`Ctrl-x` to open them in horizontal split window panes, or `Ctrl-o` to open them
in vertical split window panes.

**Refreshing the list of files**

This is a simple tip but I'm sure some people aren't aware that when you add a new 
file whilst Vim is still open then Ctrl-p would have cached the intial set of
files in that directory (and sub directories) and so it wont have any new files
created within its cache.

To refresh the cache simply press the `F5` key when Ctrl-p is open.

### Ack

I wont go into the details of how to use Ack as I've covered this in a previous
Vim post (so go read that instead). I will say that being able to carry out
global searches is incredibly useful and something I do on a regular basis and
so if you're not taking advantage of vimgrep, Ack or Ag or whatever search tool
then you're missing a trick.

### NERDTree

Again, I've covered NERDTree in a previous post so if you're after the basics
then go read that first.

**Bookmarks**

There are some useful things you can do with NERDTree outside of simple file
system viewing and one of those is "Bookmarks".

When your cursor is on a particular directory or file then enter the command
`:bookmark my_bookmark_name`.

Next time you open NERDTree you can press `B` to show your bookmarks and then
hit enter on `my_bookmark_name` and it'll take you directly to the bookmarked
directory/file.

**Modifying files and folders**

Press `m` to bring up a menu that lets you add, edit
or delete the currently highlighted file or folder. Just follow the instructions on
the screen.

**Easy toggling**

I've mapped `\'` to the command `:NERDTreeToggle<cr>` so it is a lot quicker and
easier to toggle the NERDTree open and closed.

**Searching**

If you have a very long list of directories which you
have to scroll through, then because NERDTree is essentially just another Vim window
you can use the `/` search feature to quickly skip ahead to the item you're
interested in.

### Surround

This is an awesome plugin that does one thing and does it well. It allows you to
quickly change the surrounding tabs or quotation marks of a selection or word.

The basic command is `cs` followed by either `t` for tag or `"` or `'` or
whatever the surround syntax is.

So for example, to change `<p>text</p>` to `<div>test</div>` just run
`cst<div>`.

If you have `"test"` and you want `'test'` instead then just run `cs"'`.

You can also delete the delimiters (surrounding syntax) using `d` instead of
`c`. 

So for example, if you have `"test"` and you want to remove the quotations then just use `ds"`.

You can also add syntax to a word that doesn't have it by doing `ysiw` followed
by the punctuation you want to surround the word with (e.g. `ysiw]` to have
square brackets around the word).

Note: when adding surrounding syntax be aware that the right side bracket is
what you should use if you want no space, and the left side bracket if you want
a space included. For example, if you wanted `[ abc ]` then run `ysiw[`. But if
you want `[abc]` then use `ysiw]` instead.

The standard syntax for adding surrounding syntax is `ys` followed by your
selection command (e.g. this could be `$` to select to the end of the line)
followed by the punctuation you want to use or `iw` to select the current word.

You can also visually select a piece of text and then use `Shift-S` followed by the punctuation you want to insert.

## Configuration

For the full configuration set-up have a look at my "[Fresh Install](https://github.com/Integralist/Fresh-Install)" repo.
Below are just a few different vim settings (most are outright stolen from
my colleague [Simon Thulbourn](https://github.com/sthulb) so do take a look at
his dotfile set-up).

### Settings

    " switch syntax highlighting on, when the terminal has colors
    syntax on

    " use vim, not vi api
    set nocompatible

    " no backup files
    set nobackup

    " no write backup
    set nowritebackup

    " no swap file
    set noswapfile

    " command history
    set history=100

    " always show cursor
    set ruler

    " show incomplete commands
    set showcmd

    " incremental searching
    set incsearch

    " highlight search
    set hlsearch

    " ignore case in search
    set smartcase

    " make sure any searches /searchPhrase doesn't need the \c escape character
    set ignorecase

    " a buffer is marked as ‘hidden’ if it has unsaved changes, and it is not
    currently loaded in a window
    " if you try and quit Vim while there are hidden buffers, you will raise an
    error:
    " E162: No write since last change for buffer “a.txt”
    set hidden

    " disable folding because it is evil
    set nofoldenable

    " turn word wrap off
    set nowrap

    " scroll with more context
    set scrolloff=10

    " allow backspace to delete end of line, indent and start of line characters
    set backspace=indent,eol,start

    " convert tabs to spaces
    set expandtab

    " set tab size
    set tabstop=4

    " the number of spaces inserted for a tab
    set shiftwidth=4

    " turn on line numbers
    set number

    " highlight tailing whitespace
    set list listchars=tab:\ \ ,trail:·

    " get rid of the delay when pressing O (for example)
    " http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2158516/vim-delay-before-o-opens-a-new-line
    set timeout timeoutlen=1000 ttimeoutlen=100

    " always show status bar
    set laststatus=2

    " set the status line to something useful
    set statusline=%f\ %=L:%l/%L\ %c\ (%p%%)

    " hide the toolbar
    set guioptions-=T

    " utf encoding
    set encoding=utf-8

    " autoload files that have changed outside of vim
    set autoread

    " use system clipboard
    "
    http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8134647/copy-and-paste-in-vim-via-keyboard-between-different-mac-terminals
    set clipboard+=unnamed

    " don't show intro
    set shortmess+=I

    " better splits
    set splitbelow
    set splitright

### File types

    " turn indentation on
    filetype indent on

    " enable filetype plugins
    filetype plugin on

### Commands

    " jump to last cursor
    autocmd BufReadPost *
      \ if line("'\"") > 0 && line("'\"") <= line("$") |
      \   exe "normal g`\"" |
      \ endif

    fun! StripTrailingWhitespace()
        " don't strip on these filetypes
        if &ft =~ 'markdown'
            return
        endif
        %s/\s\+$//e
    endfun
    autocmd BufWritePre * call StripTrailingWhitespace()

    " file formats
    autocmd Filetype gitcommit setlocal spell textwidth=72
    autocmd Filetype markdown setlocal textwidth=80
    autocmd FileType cucumber,ruby,yaml setl sw=2 sts=2 et

    " specify syntax highlighting for specific files
    au Bufread,BufNewFile *.spv set filetype=php
    au Bufread,BufNewFile *.md set filetype=markdown " Vim interprets .md as
    'modula2' otherwise, see :set filetype?

### Plugins

    " Declare bundles are handled via Vundle
    set rtp+=$HOME/.vim/bundle/vundle
    call vundle#rc()

    " Let Vundle manage Vundle
    Bundle 'gmarik/vundle'

    " CtrlP
    Bundle 'kien/ctrlp.vim'
    map <leader>t <C-p>
    map <leader>y :CtrlPBuffer<cr>
    let g:ctrlp_show_hidden=1
    let g:ctrlp_working_path_mode=0
    let g:ctrlp_max_height=30
    set wildignore+=*/.git/*,*/.hg/*,*/.svn/*.,*/.DS_Store

    " Tomorrow Night Theme
    Bundle 'jlangston/tomorrow-night-vim'
    :silent! :colorscheme tomorrow-night-bright

    " Markdown
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-markdown'

    " Markdown (allow piping of markdown files to the browser)
    au BufEnter,BufNew *.md map <enter> :wa\|!rbfu rdiscount % \| bcat<cr>

    " Cucumber
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-cucumber'

    " Tags
    " First run `ctags -R` within the root directory (this is installed via
    Homebrew)
    " Second within your file, on a method/class/object (whatever) press `Ctrl+]`
    Bundle 'xolox/vim-misc'
    Bundle 'majutsushi/tagbar'
    let g:tagbar_ctags_bin='/usr/local/bin/ctags'

    " Tags
    " Open Tagbar when pressing <leader>b
    " And automatically close it after selecting something
    :map <leader>b :TagbarOpenAutoClose<cr>

    " Tab completion
    Bundle 'ervandew/supertab'

    " Enable repeating supported plugin maps with '.'
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-repeat'

    " Comment out stuff
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-commentary.git'

    " Ack (uses Ag behind the scenes)
    Bundle 'mileszs/ack.vim'
    let g:ackprg = 'ag --nogroup --nocolor --column'

    " Applies `end` keyword to relevant lines of ruby code
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-endwise'

    " Status line design improvements
    Bundle 'Lokaltog/powerline'
    set rtp+=~/.vim/bundle/powerline/powerline/bindings/vim

    " Gists
    Bundle 'mattn/webapi-vim'
    Bundle 'vim-scripts/Gist.vim'
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-fugitive'

    " Gists (Github settings)
    let g:github_user = $GITHUB_USER
    let g:github_token = $GITHUB_TOKEN

    " HTML generation (in NORMAL mode Ctrl+y then , <C-y,>)
    Bundle 'mattn/emmet-vim'

    " Rename variables and files in your code
    Bundle 'vim-scripts/rename.vim'

    " tmux switcher
    "
    http://robots.thoughtbot.com/post/53022241323/seamlessly-navigate-vim-and-tmux-splits
    Bundle 'christoomey/vim-tmux-navigator'

    " Git gutter
    Bundle 'airblade/vim-gitgutter'
    let g:gitgutter_enabled = 1
    let g:gitgutter_eager = 0
    let g:gitgutter_sign_column_always = 1
    highlight clear SignColumn

    " File System
    Bundle 'vim-scripts/The-NERD-tree'
    map <leader>' :NERDTreeToggle<cr>

    " Snippets
    Bundle 'MarcWeber/vim-addon-mw-utils'
    Bundle 'tomtom/tlib_vim'
    Bundle 'garbas/vim-snipmate'

    " SCSS, Sass & Haml Syntax Support
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-haml'

    " Surround text with HTML or punctuation
    Bundle 'tpope/vim-surround'

    " HTML5 syntax
    Bundle 'othree/html5.vim'

    " Tabularize
    Bundle 'godlygeek/tabular'
    map <Leader>e :Tabularize /=<cr>
    map <Leader>c :Tabularize /:<cr>

    " JS Hint
    Bundle 'Shutnik/jshint2.vim'

## Useful Vim features/commands

Part of my Vim workflow is to use Vim as efficiently as possible. To try and
take advantage of all the things it does well (such as short key commands to
help make mundane tasks quicker and easier) and to find solutions to problems
that Vim might not handle so well. 

Here follows are some such tips and tricks...

### Search and Replace across multiple files

Surprisingly this is quite a difficult task to achieve and is one of Vim's greatest failings.

There are two ways this can be done, and neither is perfect. 

You've got the Vim way and the Unix way.

#### The Vim Way

There are a couple of potential work-arounds in Vim. One way is to use either multiple files already open 
(so multiple buffers are open) or multiple files specified as arguments when opening Vim.

This relies on either the `bufdo` or `argdo` command (depending on whether
you're going to use buffers or arguments)..

`bufdo` executes a command for all buffers open, and `argdo` does the same for
files specified via arguments when opening Vim.

There is also `windo` if you have multiple windows open.

The command to run would be (I'm going to use `bufdo` as I almost never open Vim
with files specified via arguments, I always use Ctrl-p to open files): 

`:bufdo %s/search/replace/ge | update`

...the trick is the `e` flag which tells Vim to ignore any errors (which could
occur if a file you're searching doesn't find a match). 

The first half of the command tells Vim to do the search and replace and updates
the buffers, but we don't *write* to the buffer! That's why we then pipe over to
the `update` command to write to the files (this only writes to the file if it
has been modified).

If you want to use the argument list but not have to pass all those names as
arguments when opening Vim then you can just use `:args *.txt` to add all txt
files to the argument list (note: doing this will open each of those files,
again one of the downsides of using Vim for this task).

**Problems?**

Again, search and replace across multiple files is really difficult for Vim
sadly.

One of the main issues is that Vim will open all the specified files (which
could be a lot of files!). You could limit the number of files it searches by
specifying a directory or subset of files to check, but if you don't know
where to search then your only option is to search the entire code base and
that's a crazy number of files (it would be for me working on the BBC News code base) to have open within Vim.

There are alternatives but they also aren't as great as you'd hope, such as not using Vim at all...

#### The Unix Way

`sed -i -- 's/search_pattern/replacement/' *.txt && rm *.txt--`

...this uses
[sed](http://www.integralist.co.uk/posts/unix-commands/#sed-find-and-replace)
along with the 'edit in place' `-i` flag (which tells sed to apply the changes
to a temp file first and then overwrite the original file).

Typically the `-i` flag will be followed with a file extension so sed knows what
type of temp file needs to be saved to (e.g. `-i.bak` would save the changes
temporarily to a test1.txt.bak file), so I opted for `--`.

After that you pass in the search pattern and the replacement and then what
files to check against.

Finally we need to remove the temp files that have been created `rm *.txt--`.

Not completely ideal, I know, as it effectively has similar issues to the Vim way in
that you have to try and filter down files searched (although I'd argue doing
this via the shell should/could be more efficient than from within Vim).

#### The GNU Way

The very last way is the same as the previous solution but is the one I use
now...

`gsed -i 's/search_pattern/replacement/' **/*.txt`

...this is the GNU version of the sed command which you can install using `brew
install gnu-sed`.

Notice that you don't need to specify a temporary file to write to (and so no
extra files to have to remove).

This for me is the best way to handle this type of issue.

All of the above should cover the majority of solutions you'll find on the internet for this problem.

### Moving between brackets

It can be useful sometimes to be able to jump between opening and closing
brackets (especially when working on code), this is where `Shift-%` comes in.

### Auto indenting

This is one of those Vim commands most people (even experienced Vim users
aren't aware of). It's an essential tool for me when programming now and since
discovering it I find I use it all the time.

If we want to auto indent all content inside a code block then we can do this
one of two ways:

1. whilst cursor is placed on either the opening or closing code block bracket
2. whilst cursor is somewhere inside the code block

For the first scenario you can use: `=%`

For the second scenario you can use: `=i{` or `=i}`

### Changing content

Another small tip that really does save we a lot of time is when I'm in the
middle of a word and I want to either edit or select that word.

What I used to do was move `b` to the start of the word and then either `ce` or `ve`.

But I discovered recently that I can skip the first `b` command. I can do what I
need to whilst my cursor is placed anywhere inside the word using: `ciw` (change
inside word) or `viw` (select inside word).

Also, I recently discovered that you can delete a specific number of characters using something 
like `c2l` or `d2l` (change or delete 2 characters). In this command `l` means 'letter'. That can
be quite useful as well.

### Selecting content

Most Vim users probably know this but just in case you don't, to be able to
select content inside of a set of punctuation (such as a brackets or quotations)
then use: `vi(` or `vi'` or `vi"` (you get the idea).

### Using the register

One of the real annoying issues I have is when I have some content I want to
copy and paste to another place in my code. Imagine you have the following
code...

    /**
     * @param abc
     */
    function someThing (def) {
        //
    }

...I want to replace `def` with `abc` so the first thing I do is yank/copy the
`abc`, then move to the parenthesis, but rather than manually delete `def` and
then paste my content I'll do a `di(` to delete the content first. 

This causes me a problem because it updates the register list (which tracks 
everything that has been yanked). Any time you change or delete content it gets 
copied to the register list. So if I was to paste now I'd just end up pasting
`def` as the delete command has placed that at the top of my register list.

So I'll end up having to go back and re-copy `abc` and then head back again to
the parenthesis to paste it in.

My colleague showed me this alternative better workflow: copy `abc` and still delete
inside the parenthesis, but if you execute `:reg` and look at the list there
you'll see something like `"1 abc`. I can then reuse that particular item by
typing `"1p` (so I grab what's held at `"1` and then use the paste command).

It might sound like I'm doing more work by looking up what's in the register
list, but really I'm saving myself time compared to moving my cursor back to the original
location and re-copying `abc` and then moving back to parenthesis and pasting.

### Buffer management

This should be common knowledge for Vim users: when you open a file then Vim
places the contents of that file inside of a buffer. When you edit the buffer
then the original file is left unchanged until the buffer itself is written back
to the file (e.g. `:w`).

When you have multiple files open then you have multiple buffers. To close the
current buffer you can run the command `:bd`.

You can also view all open buffers with `:ls`.

But the one trick I find most useful is to close all open buffers and this again
relies on `bufdo` which we saw earlier when looking at a global search and
replace solution.

If you run the command `:bufdo bd` then it'll simply run the close buffer
command `bd` for every buffer currently open. Simple.

Within my .vimrc file I've mapped those last two items to more easily accessible keys...

    " List Buffers
    map <leader>yt :ls<cr>

    " Delete all Buffers (runs the delete buffer command on all open buffers)
    map <leader>yd :bufdo bd<cr>

### Jump List

The 'jump list' keeps a record of all your cursor positions/movements. It came
in handy whilst I was writing this post actually and I'll explain how in a
moment.

To view all cursor positions/movements just run the `:jumps` command.

To move backwards through each jump item use `Ctrl-o` and to move forward use
`Ctrl-i`. Straight forward enough.

The reason this was useful to me was I wanted to create a 'Table of Contents'
for this post and so I already had the headers (e.g. `### Jump List`) written
out and so what I was doing was using the `/` find command to locate all `###`
and then copying the title and moving back to the top of the document to paste
it into a list.

The problem I was having was after I pasted the item at the top of this post's
source file, I couldn't remember the line number I had just come from. So
instead of pressing `n` to start moving back through all highlighted `###`
headers I instead just pressed `Ctrl-o` and it too me back to the last `###` I
had just moved from. Meaning I could continue on from where I left off.

As you can see, it's knowledge such as this that makes Vim users more efficient.
I might not use this technique often, but because I know it exists I can take
advantage of it when I do need it.

### Change List

The 'change list' is the same as the '[jump list](#jump-list)'. But as I'm sure you've already
guessed, it records any changes made to the document. 

What might not be clear is that it only records changes made when inside INSERT mode.

So to view all changes run the command `:changes`.

To move back through the change list use `g;` and to move forward use `g,`.

Be aware that this isn't the same as (u)ndo or `Ctrl-r` (redo) as they move
backwards and forwards through changes and actually affect the list. The change
list just moves the cursor's position to the place of a change.

### Case Insensitive Searching

Although you can set a case-insensitive search (e.g. `/mySearchTerm`) via your .vimrc, 
you can also use the `\c` flag at the end of your search term `/mySearchTerm\c`.

### Regular Expressions

If you look at [http://vimregex.com/](http://vimregex.com/) you'll realise that
Vim only supports a subset of modern Regex features.

To make things more awkward Vim also has an odd default engine which means
things like capturing groups `(stuff to be captured)` needs to be escaped like
so: `\(stuff to be captured\)` which is ugly and hard to have to remember
(considering nearly all programming languages don't require this type of syntax
modification).

So to resolve that you can tell Vim to use "very magic mode" (there are other
modes for Vim to use with Regular Expressions but this is the only one of
importance to me - and likely to you as well).

To use "very magic mode" just add `\v` to the beginning of your regex. 

So imagine you want to capture the words "very magic" in standard Vim regex mode
you'd need to write `:%s/\(very magic\)//gc` but we don't want to have to escape
the capturing group syntax so we do the following instead `:%s/\v(very magic)//gc`

Note: referencing captured groups differs between programming languages. Some
use `$1` and others use `\1` (which makes them consistent with 'back
references'). In Vim they use the latter `\1` style.

### Removing line spaces

Pressing `Shift-J` will remove a line break for you.

This doesn't sound like much of a tip but this is another of those commands I
end up using a lot.

So it'll convert...

    Here is some text
    that is split by a line break

...into...

    Here is some text that is split by a line break

### Switching case

One thing I used to hate doing is going into INSERT mode to change either a
single character or word (or worse still, an entire sentence) into different
case.

The `~` tilda command does that for you. 

So if your cursor is on a single character such as the 't' of the word 'today' 
and you press `~` (you'll likely need to hold down the Shift key if
you're on a Mac) then the casing will switch to uppercase and become 'Today'.

This can be done letter by letter or chunks of selected text.

### Moving forward and backwards by code not words

Something I didn't realise for a long time was that I could use the capitalised
version of most commands for them to do the opposite of what they normally do.

For example, `fa` will move the cursor to the first instance of the `a`
character. But `F` will move backwards for the first instance of `a` it can
find.

The reason this is important is when I'm programming and I want to move
backwards or forwards I typically use the `w` and `e` keys, but programming
syntax can be a pain to jump through like that.

Consider (and this is a contrived example, so forgive me, I realise there are
better ways)...

    this.handlePrevImageCalculations = _.debounce(function() {

...if I want to get my cursor to just before `=` then pressing `e` would take about
three presses as it would stop at the end of `this` and then `.` and finally at
the end of `handlePrevImageCalculations`.

But using `E` just the once moves there by ignoring punctuation between words.

This is the same for `W` and `B`.

### Repeating yourself

Using the `.` command can be really useful for saving yourself time repeating
yourself. Whether you've made an edit or you've indented a line of code
(whatever it happens to be), pressing `.` will repeat that change. Try and get
into the habbit of using it.

To give you an example, I used the Surround plugin (described above) to wrap my
table of contents in square brackets using `ys$]` and for each line I just
pressed `.` and it meant I didn't have to think about which four characters I 
needed to type out multiple times.

### Appending to end of a line

This tip really does save me a lot of time.

When I wanted to add some content to the end of a line I would typically use `$`
and then `a` until I realised I could just press `A` and that would do the same
thing.

OK so it saves you one key stroke. But I do this type of movement ALL THE TIME
and so that's a lot of savings you end up making.

### Searching for current word

If you want to search for the word your cursor is currently on, don't do this:

- select word `yiw`
- press `/`
- paste copied word `p`

...instead just press `Shift-8` and that'll do all of that for you.

## Conclusion

So there you have it. This is my attempt to explain my Vim workflow and to
hopefully have shared some useful Vim tips and tricks.

If you want to see my full dotfile set-up (this includes my .vimrc and other Vim
configurations) then check out my public GitHub repo "[Fresh
Install](https://github.com/Integralist/Fresh-Install)" which should tell you
everything you need to know (I update this a lot as I find better ways of doing
things).
